initial ZIP drafts for ZSA transfer and issuance (#628)
zcash/zips: draft-ZIP-0227.rst

::

  ZIP: 227
  Title: Issuance of Zcash Shielded Assets
  Owners: Daniel Benarroch <daniel@qed-it.com>
          Pablo Kogan <pablo@qed-it.com>
          Aurelien Nicolas <aurel@qed-it.com>
  Credits: Daira Hopwood
           Jack Grigg
           Shahaf Nacshon
           Vivek Arte
  Status: Draft
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2022-05-01
  License: MIT
  Discussions-To: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/618>

Terminology
===========

The key word "MUST" in this document is to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [#RFC2119]_.

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200 [#zip-0200]_.

The term "Orchard" in this document is to be interpreted as described in ZIP 224 [#zip-0224]_.

We define the following additional terms:

- Asset: A type of note that can be transferred on the Zcash block chain. ZEC is the default (and currently the only defined) asset for the Zcash mainnet.

> - Zcash Shielded Asset: an asset with issuance defined on the Zcash block chain, and, for now, belonging to the Orchard anonymity pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Zcash Shielded Asset: an asset with issuance defined on the Zcash block chain, and, for now, belonging to the Orchard shielded pool.
```

Reviewer 2: Suggestion incorporated in [PR#649](https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/649).

Reviewer 2: Suggestion incorporated in [PR#649](https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/649).

> - Wrapped Asset: a ZSA asset with native issuance defined outside the Zcash block chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Wrapped Asset: a ZSA asset with native issuance defined outside the Zcash blockchain.
```

> We define the following additional terms:
> 
> - Asset: A type of note that can be transferred on the Zcash block chain. ZEC is the default (and currently the only defined) asset for the Zcash mainnet.
> - Zcash Shielded Asset: an asset with issuance defined on the Zcash block chain, and, for now, belonging to the Orchard anonymity pool.
> - Wrapped Asset: a ZSA asset with native issuance defined outside the Zcash block chain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The terms "Asset", "Zcash Shielded Asset", and "Wrapped Asset" in this document are to be interpreted
as described in ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_.
```

Reviewer 2: Suggestion incorporated in [PR#649](https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/649).

Abstract
========

ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_ and ZIP 227 [#zip-0227]_ propose in conjunction the Zcash Shielded Assets (ZSA) protocol, which is an extension of the
Orchard protocol that enables the creation, transfer and burn of custom assets on the Zcash chain. The creation of such assets is defined
in ZIP 227 [#zip-0227]_. The transfer and burn of such assets is defined in ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_.

Motivation
==========

The current Orchard protocol does not support custom assets, which is an important aspect for the proper

> evolution of the Zcash ecosystem. Enabling multi-asset support on the Zcash chain will open the door for a host of

Reviewer: 'o rly'

Reviewer 2: We have rewritten this section

applications and enhance the ecosystem with application developers and asset custody institutions for issuance and
bridging purposes.

> 

Reviewer: This is a supporting ZIP for ZIP 226, which also lays out its motivations, but requires an issuance mechanism to be defined (which is substantial enough to stand on its own) to function.

Reviewer 2: Mentioned this

> Overview & Rationale

Reviewer: Perhaps the `rationale` should be split out into its own section and moved towards the bottom after the specification.

Reviewer 2: Has been done in [PR#649](https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/649).

====================

> This ZIP specifies the issuance mechanism of the Zcash Shielded Assets (ZSA) protocol and must work conjunction with ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_, as the issuance mechanism is only valid for the ZSA transfer protocol, as it produces notes that can only be transferred under ZSA.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This ZIP specifies the issuance mechanism of the Zcash Shielded Assets (ZSA) protocol. It must work in conjunction with ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_, as the issuance mechanism is only valid for the ZSA transfer protocol, because it produces notes that can only be transferred under ZSA.
```

Reviewer 2: Suggestion incorporated, with slight changes, in [PR#649](https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/649).

> This ZIP specifies the issuance mechanism of the Zcash Shielded Assets (ZSA) protocol and must work conjunction with ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_, as the issuance mechanism is only valid for the ZSA transfer protocol, as it produces notes that can only be transferred under ZSA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ZIP specifies the issuance mechanism of the Zcash Shielded Assets (ZSA) protocol and must work in conjunction with ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_, as the issuance mechanism is only valid for the ZSA transfer protocol, as it produces notes that can only be transferred under ZSA.
```

Reviewer 2: Suggestion incorporated in [PR#649](https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/649).

In short, we are going to enable only *transparent* issuance, since we believe that as a first step, transparency is important to properly test the applications that will be most used in the Zcash ecosystem, while enabling tracking of supply of assets. In essence, any user of the blockchain can issue new asset types, yet only a single issuer (a set of keys) can issue that specific asset type, as the asset identifiers are tied to the issuer keys.

We have designed the protocol such that at the time of issuance, the issuer can already allocate all the tokens to the corresponding owners by creating the corresponding (shielded) output notes to the corresponding addresses. As is implied, the issuance mechanism is itself transparent, but the allocation is totally private. Furthermore, in a single issuance transaction, the issuer can create multiple asset types (and allocate all of those too). Finally, a key component of our design is the `finiteIssuance` boolean that defines whether a specific asset type can have more tokens issued or not.

> The issuance mechanism is broad enough for issuers to either create native assets on Zcash (i.e.: assets that originate on the Zcash blockchain), as well as for institutions to create bridges from other chains and import wrapped assets. In fact, the protocol described below enables, what we hope will be a useful set of, applications:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The issuance mechanism is broad enough for issuers to either create native assets on Zcash (i.e.: assets that originate on the Zcash block chain), as well as for institutions to create bridges from other chains and import wrapped assets. In fact, the protocol described below enables what we hope will be a useful set of applications:
```

Reviewer 2: Suggestion incorporated in [PR#649](https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/649).

- By setting the `finiteIssuance = 1` from the first issuance instance of that asset type, the issuer is in essence creating a one-time issuance transaction. This is useful when the max supply is capped from the beginning and the distribution is known in advance. All tokens are issued at once and distributed as needed.

> - When the `finiteIssuance = 0`, the issuer can keep creating tokens of that type (in a transparent manner). The boolean value can be changed with any new issuance transaction, and could be set to `1` either when the issuer keys have been compromised, and hence stopping all issuances of that asset type (the boolean cannot be reversed), or whenever the issuer decides that the max supply has been reached.

Reviewer 4: The definition of the `finiteIssuance` boolean should move to the specification, but the goal of *having* "finite issuance chosen at asset creation" can go in the Overview. (And why this was done can go in the Rationale.)

Reviewer 4: Note: the boolean is called `finiteIssuance` here, but `finiteSupply` below. Are these the same thing?

> - When the `finiteIssuance = 0`, the issuer can keep creating tokens of that type (in a transparent manner). The boolean value can be changed with any new issuance transaction, and could be set to `1` either when the issuer keys have been compromised, and hence stopping all issuances of that asset type (the boolean cannot be reversed), or whenever the issuer decides that the max supply has been reached.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- When the `finiteIssuance = 0`, the issuer can keep creating tokens of that type (in a transparent manner). The boolean value can be set to `1` with any new issuance transaction, either when the issuer keys have been compromised in order to stop all issuances of that asset type (since the boolean cannot be reversed), or whenever the issuer decides that the maximum supply has been reached.
```

Reviewer 4: Do we want to replace "reversed" with "set to 0 once it has been set to 1"?

Reviewer 2: [PR#649] has rewritten this portion significantly, so the suggestions have not been directly applied, but the rewritten file addresses the comments.

- Note that this mechanism can be used with the burning process to control and affect the supply of any custom asset.

Asset Identifier Generation
===========================

> For every new asset, there must be a new and unique identifier of the asset. Our design decision is not to have a chosen name for the asset type, but to delegate it to an off-chain mapping, as this would imply a land-grab “war”. From this asset identifier, which is a global byte string (valid across all Zcash protocols), we derive the specific type used within the notes, as defined by the specific protocol (e.g.: for now Orchard-style, using Pallas curve)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For every new asset, there must be a new and unique identifier of the asset. Our design decision is not to have a chosen name for the asset type, but to delegate it to an off-chain mapping, as this would imply a land-grab “war”. From this asset identifier, which is a global byte string (valid across all Zcash protocols), we derive the specific type used within the notes, as defined by the specific protocol (e.g.: for now Orchard-style, using the Pallas curve).
```

> For every new asset, there must be a new and unique identifier of the asset. Our design decision is not to have a chosen name for the asset type, but to delegate it to an off-chain mapping, as this would imply a land-grab “war”. From this asset identifier, which is a global byte string (valid across all Zcash protocols), we derive the specific type used within the notes, as defined by the specific protocol (e.g.: for now Orchard-style, using Pallas curve)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For every new asset, there must be a new and unique identifier of the asset. Our design decision is not to have a chosen name for the asset type, but to delegate it to an off-chain mapping, as this would imply a land-grab “war”. From this asset identifier, which is a global byte string (valid across all Zcash protocols), we derive the specific type used within the notes, as defined by the specific protocol (e.g.: for now Orchard-style, using Pallas curve).
```

Reviewer 2: Suggestion incorporated in [PR#649](https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/649).

> The main requirement for the asset identifier is for it to be collision-free, as two different issuers should not be able to issue the same asset type. As such we need the asset identifier to be:
> 
> - pseudorandom
> - deterministic
> - dependent on the issuer ID
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main requirement for the asset identifier is for it to be collision-free, as two different issuers should not be able to issue the same asset type. As such we need the asset identifier to be:

- pseudorandom
- deterministic
- dependent on the issuer ID

```

If you don't know the private key of the issuer of the asset type you should not be able to issue more notes of an asset type or change its finite issuance flag

We define the asset identifier `assetID` (represented as a string) as

> :math:`\mathsf{assetID := GroupHash^{\mathbb{P}}}\mathsf{(issuerID || assetDesc)}`

Reviewer: What kind of string is the assetID? The output type of GroupHash is a Pallas curve group element. Hex encoding?

Author: I can resolve the first part of the comment:
After the code was written (and with the consequent code review) we changed the notation and specified much more clearly the difference between `asset_desc` which is a string and `AssetId` which is the actual group element used in the base point of the value commitment; and their relationship is specifed.

For the specific abstraction of the GroupHash into AssetIdHash, I believe it should be discussed further. At the moment this abstraction may not be needed.

Author: @paullaux this has not been resolved in that more discussion is needed to justify using a new definition of the asset ID hasher.

Reviewer 2: The structure has been changed such that the asset identifier and asset description string are global (aka unchanging across potential future protocols), and the asset base is the term used for the element of the group curve, which would change between protocols

> :math:`\mathsf{assetID := GroupHash^{\mathbb{P}}}\mathsf{(issuerID || assetDesc)}`

Reviewer: To be cross-pool unique, could this not be just the output of Blake2b?

where

> - `assetDesc` is the asset description, which includes any information pertaining to the issuance.
> - `issuerID` is the public key of the issuer, used to verify the signature on the transaction and is defined as `ik` (issuer key or issuer verification key):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `assetDesc` is the asset description, which includes any information pertaining to the issuance.
- `issuerID` is the encoding of the public key of the issuer according to <reference>, used to verify the signature on the transaction and is defined as `ik` (issuer key or issuer verification key):
```

Reviewer: Instead of 'public key', 'verifying key'?

> - `issuerID` is the public key of the issuer, used to verify the signature on the transaction and is defined as `ik` (issuer key or issuer verification key):

Reviewer 4: Can we use "issuer verification key" throughout the ZIPs, for consistency?

Author: Yes, please see the latest PR with improved terminology.

:math:`\mathsf{ik := SpendAuthSig^{Orchard}.DerivePublic(isk)}`

> which uses the same signature as the spend authorization signature, where `isk` is the issuer secret key. The verification key is derived from `isk`. In order to differentiate the `isk` and `ik` keys from the actual spend authorization key, we derive another branch of keys from the main spending key `sk` as such:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which uses the same signature scheme as the spend authorization signature, where `isk` is the issuer signing key. The verification key is derived from `isk`. In order to differentiate the `isk` and `ik` keys from the actual spend authorization key, we derive another branch of keys from the main spending key `sk` as such:
```

Author: Incorporated.

> which uses the same signature as the spend authorization signature, where `isk` is the issuer secret key. The verification key is derived from `isk`. In order to differentiate the `isk` and `ik` keys from the actual spend authorization key, we derive another branch of keys from the main spending key `sk` as such:
> 
> :math:`\mathsf{isk := ToScalar^{Orchard}(︀ PRF^{expand}_{sk} ([10])}`
> 
> This allows the issuer to use the same wallet it usually uses to transfer assets, while keeping a disconnect from the other keys. It provides further anonymity and the ability to delegate issuance of an asset (or in the future, generate a multi-signature protocol) while the rest of the keys in the wallet safe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which uses the same signature as the spend authorization signature, where `isk` is the issuer secret key. The verification key is derived from `isk`. In order to differentiate the `isk` and `ik` keys from the actual spend authorization key, we derive another branch of keys from the main spending key `sk` as such:

:math:`\mathsf{isk := ToScalar^{Orchard}(︀ PRF^{expand}_{sk} ([10])}`

This allows the issuer to use the same wallet it usually uses to transfer assets, while keeping a disconnect from the other keys. It provides further anonymity and the ability to delegate issuance of an asset (or in the future, generate a multi-signature protocol) while the rest of the keys in the wallet safe.
```

The key trees and key lifecycle management of the rest of the protocol and ZIP 32 key derivation ties into this; this should be a separate section of this ZIP including handling and management of these keys, and don't necessarily need to be handled in the same manner as regular note usage key material

Author: Regarding the domain separator, we used "0x0a" in the end.

Reviewer 2: We have subsequently updated the key derivation along the lines of ZIP 32

> This allows the issuer to use the same wallet it usually uses to transfer assets, while keeping a disconnect from the other keys. It provides further anonymity and the ability to delegate issuance of an asset (or in the future, generate a multi-signature protocol) while the rest of the keys in the wallet safe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows the issuer to use the same wallet it usually uses to transfer assets, while keeping a disconnect from the other keys. It provides further anonymity and the ability to delegate issuance of an asset (or in the future, generate a multi-signature protocol) while the rest of the keys remain in the wallet safe.
```

Author: Done.

Then we let `issuanceInfo := (assetID, finiteSupply)`, where 

- `assetID` is as defined above.

> - `finiteSupply` is a boolean variable that defines whether this issuance transaction of the specific asset type is the final issuance of tokens or not. Once `finiteSupply` is set, it cannot be unset. This allows expanding the functionality of the issuance mechanism:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `finiteSupply` is a boolean variable that defines whether this issuance transaction of the specific asset type is the final issuance of tokens or not. Once `finiteSupply` is set to 1, it cannot be unset. This allows expanding the functionality of the issuance mechanism:
```

>     - Provides `assetID` revocation in case of compromise (issue last issuance with 0 token value)

Reviewer 4: How does zero token value work?
The amount of tokens can only increase, so how is their value reduced to zero?

Reviewer 4: Can we add a way to rotate from one key to another?

This can go in a "future work" section, if we don't want to do it here.

Author: It is better explained in the new PR under "Concrete Applications", but what we mean is that in case an issuer needs to stop the supply generation of a given asset (without wanting to issue more tokens of such asset), the issue action can include a single note of value = 0 (such note will be added to the note commitment tree, but will be of not use as its value is 0 (aka a dummy note)
This does not mean that the amount of tokens or the total value of an asset is reduced in this action. Only burning mechanism enables this.

Also, added a future work section for key rotation in the proper sense.

    - Supports NFT issuance (where the first issuance with value of 1 is also the last)

Issuance Protocol
=================

> The issuance protocol allows for a single issuance to be sent to many receivers, as the issuerID does not have to match the address ownership of the notes output. Furthermore, every transaction can contain many issuance instances. The design presented in this ZIP enables several use cases for issuance of shielded assets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The issuance protocol allows for a single issuance to be sent to many receivers, as the issuerID does not have to match the address ownership of the notes output. Furthermore, every transaction can contain many issuance instances. The design presented in this ZIP enables issuance of shielded assets in various modes:
```

Author: done.

- The issuer knows in advance the receivers of the issued asset.
- The asset is of non-fungible type, where each asset type can be made part of a single “series”
- The supply of the asset is limited or not

> - The assets can be wrapped versions of assets in other chains (as long as there is a bridge that supports it)

Reviewer: Move to Overview/Motivation?

Author: This changed with the new PR, please see there.

The protocol is as follows:

> - For each asset type issued, generate a sequence of output notes, each with the following fields:
>     - ZSA output note :math:`\mathsf{ note =(d, pkd, v, \rho, \psi, \mathsf{type}_\mathbb{P}, rcm)}`, where :math:`\mathsf{type}_\mathbb{P} := \mathsf{GroupHash^{\mathbb{P}}}\mathsf{(assetID)}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For each asset type issued, generate a sequence of output notes, each with the following fields:
    - ZSA output note :math:`\mathsf{ note =(d, pk_d, v, \rho, \psi, \mathsf{type}_\mathbb{P}, rcm)}`, where :math:`\mathsf{type}_\mathbb{P} := \mathsf{GroupHash^{\mathbb{P}}}\mathsf{(assetID)}`
```

Author: done.

- Generate commitment of the note. `cm` as

> :math:`cm = \mathsf{NoteCommit^{ZSA}_{rcm}}(\mathsf{repr\mathbb{_P}(g_d)}, \mathsf{repr\mathbb{_P}(pk_d)}, v, \rho, \psi,\mathsf{type}_\mathbb{P})`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:math:`cm = \mathsf{NoteCommit^{OrchardZSA}_{rcm}}(\mathsf{repr\mathbb{_P}(g_d)}, \mathsf{repr\mathbb{_P}(pk_d)}, v, \rho, \psi,\mathsf{type}_\mathbb{P})`
```

Author: Done.

> - Sign the issuance note with the `issuerID` as the signing key, using RedPallas as its signature scheme, on the `SIGHASH` of the transaction. Note that the `SIGHASH` will change as we include a new bundle in the Zcash transaction to enable this issuance mechanism on chain.

Reviewer: Is the issuerId not the public key?

Author: Yes, sorry for the confusion in the first version. It has been now fixed.

> - Sign the issuance note with the `issuerID` as the signing key, using RedPallas as its signature scheme, on the `SIGHASH` of the transaction. Note that the `SIGHASH` will change as we include a new bundle in the Zcash transaction to enable this issuance mechanism on chain.

Reviewer: Seems we need to define the new bundle so we know the modification of the transaction

Author: Done. See the new PR.

Consensus Changes
-----------------

Issuance requires the following additions to the global state: 

> First, Zcash clients must keep a mapping `issuanceSupplyInfos` from `assetID` to `issuanceSupplyInfo := (totalSupply, finiteSupply)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, Zcash full validators must keep a mapping `issuanceSupplyInfos` from `assetID` to `issuanceSupplyInfo := (totalSupply, finiteSupply)`.
```

Author: Done.

> First, Zcash clients must keep a mapping `issuanceSupplyInfos` from `assetID` to `issuanceSupplyInfo := (totalSupply, finiteSupply)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, Zcash clients must keep a mapping `issuanceSupplyInfoMap` from `assetID` to `issuanceSupplyInfo := (totalSupply, finiteSupply)`.
```

Author: Done.

**Consensus rules**

For each issuance instance,

> - Check that `assetID` is properly constructed,

Reviewer: What is 'properly'? A bit vague

Author: Fixed in the new PR.

> - Check that each commitment `cm` is properly constructed from each “output” note,

Reviewer 3: Ditto, what is "properly constructed"?

Author: Done.

> - Check that the issuance instance has a valid signature based on the `issuerID`,

Reviewer 3: Over what, by what signature algorithm?

Author: Fixed in the new PR.

- Check that :math:`\mathsf{type}_\mathbb{P}` is properly projected into the correct curve from `assetID`. That is, that :math:`\mathsf{type}_\mathbb{P} :=  \mathsf{GroupHash^{\mathbb{P}}}\mathsf{(assetID)}`

> - If `issuanceSupplyInfo[assetID].finiteSupply`is true, reject. Otherwise, set `issuanceSupplyInfo[assetID].finiteSupply = finiteSupply` .

Reviewer 4: Can we consistently use either `0` and `1` or `true` and `false` for booleans?

Author: Yes, also corrected in the latest PR

> - If `issuanceSupplyInfo[assetID].finiteSupply`is true, reject. Otherwise, set `issuanceSupplyInfo[assetID].finiteSupply = finiteSupply` .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If `issuanceSupplyInfoMap[assetID].finiteSupply`is true, reject. Otherwise, set `issuanceSupplyInfoMap[assetID].finiteSupply = finiteSupply` .
```

Author: We removed this as it is not part of the global state.

> - Add the sum of all the values in all output notes per `assetID` to `issuanceSupplyInfo[assetID].totalSupply`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add the sum of all the values in all output notes per `assetID` to `issuanceSupplyInfoMap[assetID].totalSupply`
```

Author: Same here.

> - Add the sum of all the values in all output notes per `assetID` to `issuanceSupplyInfo[assetID].totalSupply`

Reviewer: Should only happen after transaction verification

> - After verification, add note commitment to the merkle tree.

Author: Done.

Other Considerations
====================

Fee Structures
--------------

> The fee mechanism described in this ZIP may be replaced by a future “Fee Mechanism” ZIP proposal. However, we do need to have some basic fees for the Issuance protocol, as it differs from the usual transfer mechanism in that it adds a whole new structure to the transaction bundle, it adds a new global structure for validators to keep in memory and in turn it adds new consensus rules that are independent of previous structures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fee mechanism described in this ZIP may be replaced by a future “Fee Mechanism” ZIP proposal. However, we do need to have some basic fees for the Issuance protocol, as it differs from the usual transfer mechanism in that it adds a whole new structure to the transaction bundle, it adds a new global structure for validators to keep in memory, and in turn, it adds new consensus rules that are independent of previous structures.
```

Author: Removed this as a the Fees zip is written.

There are two main factors that will affect the fee mechanism:

- The transaction size, which may take a big part of the block
- The computational power needed to verify and mine the transaction

> There is a single parameter that defines both, as there is no privacy or ZKP involved at this stage - the number of output notes in the issuance bundle:
> 
> - it trivially defines the bundle size
> - it defines the computational power as the validator must compute as many note commitments as there are output notes
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since there is no privacy involved at this stage, there is one parameter that defines transaction size and computational power: the number of output notes in the issuance bundle. The numbers of output notes defines the bundle size, and it defines the computational power as the validator must compute as many note commitments as there are output notes.

```

Author: Same.
